# Meeting Notes, May 21 2020

### Present: Scott, Brett

This was an early-stage meeting to talk about setting up a shade/canopy and flowering project at Elk Meadows.

### Environmental sensing

It would be useful to repurpose some of the EBIO grant money (leftover funds >$2000) for some environmental sensors. These could be used/redeployed to get some abiotic information within plots.

At the very least, some Thermochron sensors would be useful for validating the solar radiation model. *Note: SN looked online, the low-end Thermochrons are sold out now due to COVID-related manufacturing slowdowns. They can be ordered in July/August.*

Think about the biological mechanism. What about solar radiation influences flowering?

1. Could be soil moisture. Is it worth getting a moisture probe?

2. Related to above, is it just heat? The Thermochrons measure heat flux. Heat makes sense for *Thermopsis* because there don't appear to be any vegetative leaves. Not clear for *Campanula*; maybe this is in the botany paper.

3. Is it photosynthetically active radiation? This is measured differently than heat.

Options for some fo these are listed in the UAV biodiversity repo.

Could these be deployed overwinter? This could be very useful.

### Sampling

Be aware of the easterly aspect in the upper meadows. There's some potential confounding here.

Consider the biologically relevant scales. If thinking about plant mating, it's pollination biology. Look into foraging distances for different pollinator types; RMBL or elsewhere in Colorado could be a good idea. You want to think about this when considering the scale of movement; if study occurs in too small of a spatial scale, then dynamics will be washed out by gene exchange from outside. 

##### Sampling and the two-axis framing

We're thinking about probability of mating on two axes: a spatial axis and a temporal axis. Space is a necessary one to consider, and we are using light (in a sense) as a proxy for time. The summer phase of the experiment is assessing the relationship between light and time; the second part is to link light/time to mating.

We want to effectively sample the 2D space-time space. Don't get correlation - i.e., don't have all plants distant in time be distant in space. Ensure that you have plots which are far in space but close in time, but more importantly, *close in space but far in time/light*.

In fact, a I wonder if it would be good to plot genetic similarity over this 2D space, e.g., space axis (x), time axis (y), color = similarity?

##### Picking out sampling units

Transects aren't necessarily a bad idea if you're going across a gradient. But, this means there will be high variability between transects. You could perhaps subdivide transects, e.g., cutting them in half. But, a plot-based approach is probably better.

It would be great to sample the light environment using NEON LiDAR data and the solar radiation model. I don't know if I can do this in time for the beginning of the season. A better approach is systematically lay transect through the meadows and sample light regularly along the meadow, e.g., using a densiometer. 

To handle differences in plant abundance between shade/open areas, just sample more (lay out more plots) in shaded areas than sun. If the abundance of plants isn't a response at all, then this is statistically valid.

But, best statistical design may also be to sample evenly across the space-light space? If there's a transformation here (e.g., logit) then you'd want to have the sampling be evenly spaced on the linear scale. If there is a non-linear relationship between light and probability of flowering, consider that non-linearity as well.

Above sampling concerns may somehow relate to the **response surface design**. Read Inouye, B., 2001 in *Ecology* for this. A response surface design is an optimal design here for reasons that are similar to the reason why a randomized design is better than blocking. 

##### Spatial measurements

GPS is has precision only around 5-10 m; not good enough for this study. Drones could be pretty good, especially in the open areas. This could be good for a small (~200m) area. 

Droning would require flying as well as having a nice, easily-visible marker (e.g., the paint bucket lids), one for each plant (this could get expensive).

It's also possible that [UNAVCO](https://www.unavco.org/) would have a survey-grade GPS.

##### Note on statistical analyses

We have two separate studies here. Phase I is a study looking at light and timing of flowering (connecting light and time-axis), Phase II is a study looking at *pairs* of plants (connecting space-time and probabiltiy of mating/similarity of plants). Could this influence the sampling design? Sounds like an interesting topological data analysis problem.




